welcome to woodworking with Wes on this
segment we're going to talk about
Hardwood
in the cabinet shop we use lots of
different kinds of hardwood this is our
stock here at our cabinet shop we have
many different kinds and we use them on
kitchen jobs and on furniture jobs but
you need to know a little bit about
hardwood when you go to buy it we're
going to talk about the specific kinds
and the grating and the sizes and what
it's used for most commonly in the
cabinet shop all right I went over to my
cutoff pile and I got some little pieces
and I'm going to go through here and I'm
going to show you each piece of wood and
talk to you a little bit about it let's
first off let's talk about what we've
got here we have Hickory
maple Red Oak Alder White Oak cherry and
walnut these are the woods we use most
common in the cabinet shop each of them
has a specific application some we use
more than others but these are the most
common that we use all the time when
we're building kitchens and Furniture so
let's just start at one end and go to
the other let's start off here with our
Hickory Hickory is uh
a real hard and very dense and very
heavy wood
not as common as some of the others but
it makes a real nice kitchen and
especially in a clear finish where it
shows off the color real well now I want
to talk one thing about color for
Hickory and it is common in some of the
other Woods is the sapwood and the
Heartwood
several of different kinds of wood
cherry and walnut especially in Hickory
have a real sap wood and Heartwood
contrast very white and then your
Heartwood is your darker wood
and when you're doing your your project
you have to decide whether or not you
want to allow any of your Heartwood to
show in your project now Hickory will
you let a Heartwood show in Hickory
quite a bit we do however do what we
call uniform dark or or hardwood
when we do rustic they have a
classification of rustic heart which is
just the Heartwood and then rustic
having knots and things like that I'm
actually doing a kitchen right now that
is rustic heart clear finish but just so
you know we have hardwood and hardwood
and and sapwood on several of our
different kinds of wood Hickory is very
hard to a hardwood it's a rough on your
Machinery got to have good Sharp Tools
Sands up really nice takes a finish
beautiful I love Hickory It's a
Wonderful wood to work with just takes a
little more work
our next is maple now this piece is a
piece of soft maple and there's soft
maple and hard maple it's not a
difference in how hard the wood is more
than that it's a difference in a tree
there's a soft wood tree and a hardwood
tree a maple soft maple hard maple
typically when you get a piece of
furniture that is maple it's hard maple
soft maple we use a lot in construction
type things paint grades and and support
pieces and things like that this just
happens to be a piece of soft maple that
I had in my cutoff pile and I wanted to
show you but it's all very white like
this Maple is my least favorite wood we
use it a lot like I say for paint grade
and it works real well for that because
it's very dense and takes a paint finish
beautifully easy to work makes nice
furniture pieces and and doors and
things like that for paint grade it's a
nice wood I just am not a big fan of
maple
it's just one of those things years and
years of
our next wood is Red Oak we used to use
red oak a lot in kitchens in fact back
in the 80s you have to remember I'm old
back in the 80s when I was building lots
of kitchens we used red oak a lot and we
built almost everything out of red oak
in fact now 20 30 years later I'm doing
back and doing remodeling and taking out
the yellowed Red Oak that we did and
replacing with paint grades and some of
the other wood that we used but red oak
is a nice wood it's very uniform in
color
very little sapwood it's a nice tree to
Mill
beautiful grains takes stain beautifully
Works nice Sands up good it's really a
nice wood to work with but kind of out
of popularity right now out of Vogue
so
our next wood that we use is this is uh
Alder Alder is one of the softest
Hardwoods and remember again hardwood is
a classification of of leaf typically
when you talk about Hardwoods you're
talking about trees that have leaves
deciduous and non-deciduous trees
deciduous meaning it has leaves and the
leaves fall off in the wintertime so
when you're talking hardwood and soft
Woods soft Woods are your needle Woods
Pines
things like that so anyway but this is
one of the softest of the hardwood trees
and it's Alder and we use a lot of Alder
in cabinet Construction in fact this
piece has a knot because actually we do
a lot of knotty Alder rustic Alder is a
classification that depending upon who
you're talking to but Alder is a nice
smooth wood has a nice even color and it
takes stain very well you can stain it
almost any color you want to and takes a
nice finish
so it's a nice wood to work with
our next wood is White Oak now
here's our red oak tree and here's our
white oak tree and you can see that the
white oak is actually Brown in
comparison to the red in the red oak but
that's just again a classification of
the tree but it's still an oak tree same
family just a different tree we use a
lot of White Oak in Furniture in fact if
you go back and you look at the
Victorian age Furniture the Golden Oak
period of furniture which was late 1800s
early 1900s most everything that they
did was white oak if you are familiar
with furniture that is quartersawn Oak
courtesan is always White Oak the flecks
that that show up tiger striping or Flex
that to show up in the white in the in
the quarter-sawn oak furniture is only
indicative of the White Oak and we use
it now a lot in the cabinet business
it's become very popular and again nice
beautiful wood Sands great machines
great takes great stains I like it a
little more natural than than some of
the darker stains but on the cortisone
the darker stains show up that tiger
striping better so it just depends this
is a piece what we call flat cut and in
another video I'll explain how wood is
milled and how you get quarters on and
how you get flat cut and things like
that but today just to know this is flat
cut White Oak
this is my favorite wood right here this
is Cherry American cherry and not the
Cherry like you pick cherries off for a
cherry pie this is Cherry that we use
for lumber and it's a beautiful
beautiful even grained wood but remember
we talked about the sapwood
Cherry is a wood that has this piece
doesn't have any but cherry wood has a
real white sapwood and so when we're
building stuff out of cherry you want to
stay with heart wood only the nice red
wood that makes uh Cherry it again we
use this a lot in cabinet and especially
a lot in Furniture
entertainment centers bookcases desks
things like that look beautiful when
they're out of cherry you can put a nice
natural finish on it or just a natural
clear finish on it or it takes stain
very well I actually like mine stained a
little to the brown side stay away from
the red because typical
uh Old Cherry people think of cherry
when they think of the real red
furniture that was kind of an
old-fashioned way of finishing Cherry it
always had a real red stain Cherry's not
red you can see it has a red tan tinge
to it but it's not a red wood so you can
put a lot of different kinds of stain on
there and like I say I like to stain
mine a little to the brown side and
makes a beautiful finish really really
pretty in furniture
this is a piece of black walnut and this
is probably the most expensive
domestic hardwood now domestics we're
not going to do get into the Exotics
today and there's a lot of Exotics I'm
just talking about American grown
domestic Hardwoods that we use in the
cabinet shop
so this is probably the most expensive
of the domestic Hardwoods that you can
get beautiful black walnut American
black walnut just a gorgeous wood again
Sands nice stains nice but it's also got
a beautiful natural finish when you just
put a natural finish on it it just is
wonderful but again when we talked about
hardwood this has got just a little
Fleck of hardwood Walnut has a lot of of
sapwood I mean not hardwood this is
hardwood sapwood Walnut has a real thick
layer of sap wood around the tree and so
when it's milled you'll often see white
stripes
those white stripes you always have to
cut off and Mill away and so when you
want just the beautiful dark Heart Wood
to make your furniture out of it just
has such a nice wood to work with
you you get some real nice figure when
you get next to knots and crotches and
things like that in Walnut it really has
beautiful stuff
a lot of the furniture that we do
nowadays will use what we call Rustic or
knotty Walnut rustic is a more of a it's
just a way of describing the fact that
it's got a few knots in it it really
brings out that character in The Grain
makes it look really cool and when you
stain it that just really pops I love it
that way okay the next thing we're going
to talk about when we talk about when
you go to the lumber yard they're going
to ask you okay what kind of wood you
want we talked about what kind of wood
you want and and what you're going to
use it for but there's other
classifications that you need to be
aware of while you're at the lumber yard
one of them is thickness
this is three quarters of an inch thick
and when you go in to buy your Lumber
it's always not milled right down to
three quarters it's what they call Four
quarter one inch thought stock well
that's what it's cut at the lumber yard
or at The Sawmill it's cut one inch then
it's Kiln dried it shrinks a little bit
and then they'll Mill it a little bit
before they send it off to the lumber
yard so 15 16 sometimes even 7 8 and
then you take it back to the cabinet
shop and Mill it down even more like to
three quarter before you have a finished
stock to work with but four quarters now
thicker dimensions and I brought a piece
of thicker stock this is actually a
piece of old Walnut much thicker you see
well they don't call it inch and a half
or inch and three quarter it's all done
in quarters so you have four quarter
five quarter six quarter and eight
quarter stock now remember that as they
dry it it shrinks a little bit so say I
wanted to build something and I wanted
to be a full inch and a half thick well
I can't go in and by six quarter which
is inch and a half I can't buy a piece
of six quarter and end up with a milled
inch and a half piece I have to actually
go and buy a piece of eight quarter two
inches and Mill it down to a net of inch
and a half in order to end up with inch
and a half so always when you go by
be aware of how much material you want
to end up with and then buy enough wood
the thickness of the wood so that after
the Milling that you are required to
make you end up with the net that you
need if you're okay with net three
quarters
four quarter stock if you need a full
net one inch you have to buy five
quarter if you want inch and a half net
you have to buy a quart just something
to keep in mind when you go to the
lumber yard
now grading is another thing
we've talked about thickness we've
talked about the woods and the different
kinds but when you go to the lumber yard
you're going to ask you what uh quality
of wood you want
most of what you see here is clear
there you'll need to when you go to your
lumber yard talk to them and find out
how they classify it uh different
retailers or wholesalers I buy Mike from
a wholesale lumber yard
um we'll have different classifications
and you need to talk to them and find
out what their classification uh jargon
is if I go into my lumber yard and I
want clear cherry
FAS first and seconds
and it's usually milled
S2s surfaced two sides rough on the edge
you can have it S2s 1e surface two sides
and one Edge
um
these are just things you need to know
but again
clear if you want if you don't mind a
knot or if you don't mind some of the
white sap wood on the sides one common
is a is the next classification lower
than FAS or clear
and one common has some knots has some
white striping on it the sap wood
not as good a piece of wood but if
you're looking for a little character in
your wood or looking for some distress
maybe that's what you want to go
Alder when we use Alder we use naughty
Alder quite a bit and so the
classification for Naughty Elder isn't
one common it's naughty alderin and the
particular lumber yard that I my mine
from has a classification for a little
bit of Nadi and a lot of naughty and
they'll just they have a premium naughty
and a standard naughty Alder or rustic
Alder depending upon how you want to
classify it one has more knots than the
other some of the knots are tight have
not too much black maybe like that
the standard rustic Alder will have
bigger knots some of them even open with
holes through it you have to be careful
when you buy wood you have to just know
what you're buying ask questions don't
be afraid to ask questions
um Oak will come
um rustic and clear
White Oak will come rustic and clear
Maple is almost always just clear again
Hickory is rustic and clear Walnut
rustic and clear or uh just you know
just be sure that when you go in you ask
questions you know what you're trying to
buy you know what you're trying to build
with it and then you can get the proper
wood
I hope this helped you I hope I haven't
confused you
we'll see you next time on woodworking
with Wes
[Music]